---
title: "Demystifying lvalues"
---

The `&` operator in C can be confusing.
If we do `p[1][2]` then two memory loads happen: one for `p[1]` and one for `p[1][2]`. If we do `&(p[1][2])` then only one load happens.
This is weird, because that means that the semantics of `&` cannot be compositional: the meaning of `&(p[1][2])` is not the meaning of `&` applied to `p[1][2]`.

Or does it? Below I will give a compositional reading of `&` and `*` that I learned from [Robbert Krebbers](https://robbertkrebbers.nl).

We pretend that we have *two* pointer types, `ptr<t>` and `lvalue<t>`.
The type `ptr<t>` is written written `*t` in C, but I write `ptr<t>` for consistency.
The type `lvalue<t>` is a new type that we introduce.
An `lvalue<t>` is represented as an integer, exactly like a `ptr<t>`.
The purpose of lvalues is to control automatic dereference to t:
the only difference is that a `ptr<t>` is not automatically dereferenced, but an `lvalue<t>` is.
- `*p` takes a `ptr<t>` and turns it into an `lvalue<t>`
- `&x` takes an `lvalue<t>` and turns it into a `ptr<t>`
- assignment `x = y` operates on an lvalue `x`
- a plain variable mention `x` gives an lvalue, the memory location of the variable on the stack
- accessing a field on an lvalue gives an lvalue (at runtime this is an integer add)
- `load` takes an `lvalue<t>` and turns it into a `t`, doing the actual memory access. `load` is implicitly inserted by the compiler.

Note that `*p` and `&x` don't actually do anything, they just change the type of the expression. Only `load` and assignment `x = y` actually do something.

Example 1:
```c
p[1] + 2
```
Firstly, `p[1]` is equivalent to `*(p+1)`, so this is really:
```c
*(p+1) + 2
```
The `*(p+1)` gives an lvalue, but for the addition `+ 2` we need the actual value, so we need to insert a `load`:
```c
load(*(p+1)) + 2
```
Example 2:
```c
&p[1]
```
This is equivalent to `&*(p+1)`. The `&` and `*` cancel out, so this is just:
```c
p+1
```
Example 3:
```c
&(p[1][2])
```
This is equivalent to `&(*(*(p+1) + 2))`. As before, for the addition `*(p+1) + 2` we need the actual value, so we need to insert a `load`:
```c
&(*(load(*(p+1)) + 2))
```
The outer `&` and `*` cancel out, so this is just:
```c
load(*(p+1)) + 2
```
Example 5:
```c
&x
```
We take the address of a variable. This works because if we mention a variable, we get an lvalue, which is the memory location of the variable.
Subsequently, the `&x` gives a `ptr<int>`, thus supressing the automatic dereference.

In fact, in the above examples we should have inserted even more `load`s:
in an expression like `p+1`, where `p` is a variable, we should have inserted a `load` to get the actual value of `p`:
```c
load(p) + 1
```
This makes sense because variables are stored on the stack, we we do need an actual memory load.
Storing variables in registers is an optimization that the compiler does for us, but only if it can prove that no pointer to the variable will be used.

## Summary

We can view `*` and `&` as no-ops that change the type of a pointer to an lvalue and vice versa.
Memory loads are implicitly inserted whenever we need the actual value of an lvalue.